THE STRONGER
A SCENE
1890

PERSONS

MRS. X., an actress, married.
MISS Y., an actress, unmarried.


THE STRONGER

SCENE

[A corner of a ladies' restaurant; two small tables of cast-iron,
a sofa covered with red plush, and a few chairs.]

[MRS. X. enters dressed in hat and winter coat, and carrying a
pretty Japanese basket on her arm.]

[MISS Y. has in front of her a partly emptied bottle of beer; she is
reading an illustrated weekly, and every now and then she exchanges
it for a new one.]

MRS. X. Well, how do, Millie! Here you are sitting on Christmas Eve
as lonely as a poor bachelor.

[MISS Y. looks up from the paper for a moment, nods, and resumes
her reading.]

MRS. X. Really, I feel sorry to find you like this--alone--alone in
a restaurant, and on Christmas Eve of all times. It makes me as sad
as when I saw a wedding party at Paris once in a restaurant--the
bride was reading a comic paper and the groom was playing billiards
with the witnesses. Ugh, when it begins that way, I thought, how
will it end? Think of it, playing billiards on his wedding day!
Yes, and you're going to say that she was reading a comic paper--
that's a different case, my dear.

[A WAITRESS brings a cup of chocolate, places it before MRS. X.,
and disappears again.]

MRS. X. [Sips a few spoonfuls; opens the basket and displays a
number of Christmas presents] See what I've bought for my tots.
[Picks up a doll] What do you think of this? Lisa is to have it.
She can roll her eyes and twist her head, do you see? Fine, is it
not? And here's a cork pistol for Carl. [Loads the pistol and pops
it at Miss Y.]

[MISS Y. starts as if frightened.]

MRS. X. Did I scare you? Why, you didn't fear I was going to shoot
you, did you? Really, I didn't think you could believe that of me.
If you were to shoot _me_--well, that wouldn't surprise me the
least. I've got in your way once, and I know you'll never forget
it--but I couldn't help it. You still think I intrigued you away
from the Royal Theatre, and I didn't do anything of the kind--
although you think so. But it doesn't matter what I say, of course--
you believe it was I just the same. [Pulls out a pair of embroidered
slippers] Well, these are for my hubby-—tulips--I've embroidered
them myself. Hm, I hate tulips--and he must have them on everything.

[MISS Y. looks up from the paper with an expression of mingled
sarcasm and curiosity.]

MRS. X. [Puts a hand in each slipper] Just see what small feet Bob
has. See? And you should see him walk--elegant! Of course, you've
never seen him in slippers.

[MISS Y. laughs aloud.]

MRS. X. Look here--here he comes. [Makes the slippers walk across
the table.]

[MISS Y. laughs again.]

MRS. X. Then he gets angry, and he stamps his foot just like this:
"Blame that cook who can't learn how to make coffee." Or: "The
idiot--now that girl has forgotten to fix my study lamp again."
Then there is a draught through the floor and his feet get cold:
"Gee, but it's freezing, and those blanked idiots don't even know
enough to keep the house warm." [She rubs the sole of one slipper
against the instep of the other.]

[MISS Y. breaks into prolonged laughter.]

MRS. X. And then he comes home and has to hunt for his slippers--
Mary has pushed them under the bureau. Well, perhaps it is not
right to be making fun of one's own husband. He's pretty good for
all that--a real dear little hubby, that's what he is. You should
have such a husband--what are you laughing at? Can't you tell?
Then, you see, I know he is faithful. Yes, I know, for he has told
me himself--what in the world makes you giggle like that? That
nasty Betty tried to get him away from me while I was on the road—-
can you think of anything more infamous? [Pause] But I'd have
scratched the eyes out of her face, that's what I'd have done if I
had been at home when she tried it. [Pause] I'm glad Bob told me
all about it, so I didn't have to hear it first from somebody else.
[Pause] And just think of it, Betty was not the only one! I don't
know why it is, but all women seem to be crazy after my husband. It
must be because they imagine his government position gives him
something to say about the engagements. Perhaps you've tried it
yourself--you may have set your traps for him, too? Yes, I don't
trust you very far--but I know he never cared for you--and then I
have been thinking you rather had a grudge against him.

[Pause. They look at each other in an embarrassed manner.]

MRS. X. Amèlia, spend the evening with us, won't you? Just to show
that you are not angry--not with me, at least. I cannot tell
exactly why, but it seems so awfully unpleasant to have you--you
for an enemy. Perhaps because I got in your way that time
[rallentando] or--I don't know--really, I don't know at all--

[Pause. MISS Y. gazes searchingly at MRS. X.]

MRS. X. [Thoughtfully] It was so peculiar, the way our acquaintance--
why, I was afraid of you when I first met you; so afraid that I did
not dare to let you out of sight. It didn't matter where I tried to
go--I always found myself near you. I didn't have the courage to be
your enemy--and so I became your friend. But there was always
something discordant in the air when you called at our home, for I
saw that my husband didn't like you--and it annoyed me just as it
does when a dress won't fit. I tried my very best to make him
appear friendly to you at least, but I couldn't move him--not until
you were engaged. Then you two became such fast friends that it
almost looked as if you had not dared to show your real feelings
before, when it was not safe--and later--let me see, now! I didn't
get jealous--strange, was it not? And I remember the baptism--you
were acting as godmother, and I made him kiss you--and he did, but
both of you looked terribly embarrassed--that is, I didn't think of
it then--or afterwards, even--I never thought of it—-till--_now_!
[Rises impulsively] Why don't you say something? You have not
uttered a single word all this time. You've just let me go on
talking. You've been sitting there staring at me only, and your
eyes have drawn out of me all these thoughts which were lying in me
like silk in a cocoon--thoughts--bad thoughts maybe--let me think.
Why did you break your engagement? Why have you never called on us
afterward? Why don't you want to be with us to-night?

[MISS Y. makes a motion as if intending to speak.]

MRS. X. No, you don't need to say anything at all. All is clear to
me now. So, that's the reason of it all. Yes, yes! Everything fits
together now. Shame on you! I don't want to sit at the same table
with you. [Moves her things to another table] That's why I must put
those hateful tulips on his slippers--because you love them.
[Throws the slippers on the floor] That's why we have to spend the
summer in the mountains--because you can't bear the salt smell of
the ocean; that's why my boy had to be called Eskil--because that
was your father's name; that's why I had to wear your colour, and
read your books, and eat your favourite dishes, and drink your
drinks--this chocolate, for instance; that's why--great heavens!--
it's terrible to think of it--it's terrible! Everything was forced
on me by you—-even your passions. Your soul bored itself into mine
as a worm into an apple, and it ate and ate, and burrowed and
burrowed, till nothing was left but the outside shell and a little
black dust. I wanted to run away from you, but I couldn't. You were
always on hand like a snake with your black eyes to charm me--I
felt how my wings beat the air only to drag me down--I was in the
water, with my feet tied together, and the harder I worked with my
arms, the further down I went--down, down, till I sank to the
bottom, where you lay in wait like a monster crab to catch me with
your claws--and now I'm there! Shame on you! How I hate you, hate
you, hate you! But you, you just sit there, silent and calm and
indifferent, whether the moon is new or full; whether it's
Christmas or mid-summer; whether other people are happy or unhappy.
You are incapable of hatred, and you don't know how to love. As a
cat in front of a mouse-hole, you are sitting there!--you can't
drag your prey out, and you can't pursue it, but you can outwait
it. Here you sit in this corner--do you know they've nicknamed it
"the mouse-trap" on your account? Here you read the papers to see
if anybody is in trouble, or if anybody is about to be discharged
from the theatre. Here you watch your victims and calculate your
chances and take your tributes. Poor Amèlia! Do you know, I pity
you all the same, for I know you are unhappy--unhappy as one who
has been wounded, and malicious because you are wounded. I ought to
be angry with you, but really I can't--you are so small after all--
and as to Bob, why that does not bother me in the least. What does
it matter to me anyhow? If you or somebody else taught me to drink
chocolate--what of that? [Takes a spoonful of chocolate; then
sententiously] They say chocolate is very wholesome. And if I have
learned from you how to dress--_tant mieux_!--it has only given me
a stronger hold on my husband--and you have lost where I have
gained. Yes, judging by several signs, I think you have lost him
already. Of course, you meant me to break with him--as you did, and
as you are now regretting--but, you see, _I_ never would do that.
It won't do to be narrow-minded, you know. And why should I take
only what nobody else wants? Perhaps, after all, I am the stronger
now. You never got anything from me; you merely gave--and thus
happened to me what happened to the thief--I had what you missed
when you woke up. How explain in any other way that, in your hand,
everything proved worthless and useless? You were never able to
keep a man's love, in spite of your tulips and your passions--and I
could; you could never learn the art of living from the books--as I
learned it; you bore no little Eskil, although that was your
father's name. And why do you keep silent always and everywhere--
silent, ever silent? I used to think it was because you were so
strong; and maybe the simple truth was you never had anything to
say--because you were unable to-think! [Rises and picks up the
slippers] I'm going home now--I'll take the tulips with me—-your
tulips. You couldn't learn anything from others; you couldn't bend
and so you broke like a dry stem--and I didn't. Thank you, Amèlia,
for all your instructions. I thank you that you have taught me how
to love my husband. Now I'm going home--to him! [Exit.]

(Curtain.)
